docs: Add project security threat model (#7641)
apache/opendal: SECURITY-THREAT-MODEL.md

If a caller intentionally points OpenDAL at an untrusted S3-compatible endpoint,
WebDAV server, FTP server, database, local path, or other backend, the caller
is responsible for the consequences of trusting that backend. OpenDAL does not
authenticate remote object contents, prove remote metadata correctness, or
protect the caller from a malicious storage service that the caller chose.

That premise does not remove OpenDAL's responsibility for its own library
boundary. OpenDAL must still preserve its API contracts, keep credentials
isolated, avoid leaking secrets through debug or observability output, and avoid
memory-safety violations in code reachable through the public API.

## 3. System Model

An OpenDAL deployment has these participants:

| Participant | Role in this model |
| --- | --- |
| Host application | Trusted caller that creates `Builder`s, supplies config, applies `Layer`s, and decides which end-user input may reach OpenDAL. |
| OpenDAL | In-process library that normalizes public API inputs, builds service requests, signs requests when configured, parses service responses, and returns data or errors. |

> | Storage backend | Trusted service selected by the host application. It owns backend-side authz, object bytes, metadata, consistency, and durability. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Storage backend | A trusted service that the host application use. e.g., An OpenDAL uses connects to S3, or a database uses OpenDAL communicates with Google Cloud. OpenDAL trusts a trusted service for backend-side authentication, object bytes, metadata, consistency, and durability. |
```

| End user of the host application | Out of OpenDAL's direct model. The host application must authenticate, authorize, and sanitize end-user requests before calling OpenDAL. |
| Network attacker | Out of scope unless the report shows OpenDAL weakened the configured transport. TLS and proxy policy are delegated to the HTTP client and host environment. |

OpenDAL has no principal model. A single `Operator` has the authority granted by
its configured backend credentials and root. Every operation through that

> `Operator` has the same OpenDAL-level authority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenDAL doesn't use principal model. A `Operator` takes control of a backend service by user-provided credentials, root and other configurations. Every operation via an
`Operator` instance shares the same OpenDAL-level authority.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A typical interaction will be:

Trusted service <-> Backend <-> Operator <-> Host Application <-> End user
                 |                        |
                 |------------------------|
                    OpenDAL code surface
```

## 4. Security Boundary

OpenDAL's security boundary is the public library boundary plus the internal
state that OpenDAL owns behind that boundary.

The following properties are in scope for OpenDAL security.

### 4.1 Public API contract

OpenDAL must handle inputs accepted by the public API without memory-safety
violations, data races, panics across FFI boundaries, or inconsistent internal
state.

Examples:

- `Operator` path normalization must be deterministic and consistent with the
  documented path rules in `core/core/src/raw/path.rs`.
- `Operator::from_uri(...)` and `Operator::via_iter(...)` must build the service
  and root implied by trusted caller config.
- Public operation options such as ranges, conditional headers, metadata, and
  presign expiry must be encoded according to the selected service contract.

OpenDAL does not decide whether a host application's end user is allowed to use
a path. The host application owns that policy. However, once the host
application passes a path into OpenDAL, OpenDAL must not accidentally map it to

> a different backend location than its own API contract describes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenDAL does not care whether a host application's end user has permissions for a path access. A host application decides what and how to interact with data and path with a configured service via an `Operator` instance. In another word, if 
a host application passes a path into OpenDAL, OpenDAL must not map it to
a different backend location than that backend's API contract describes. e.g. when passing `/path` to an `Fs` operator, OpenDAL should only access `/path`.
```

filesystem paths, cache directories, temporary files, and local database paths.

For local services and layers, OpenDAL is responsible for the filesystem effects
created by its own path construction.

Examples:

- `services::Fs` documents `root` as the root under which operations happen.
  Reports showing that normalized OpenDAL paths can escape that configured root
  through OpenDAL's path construction are in scope.
- `services::Foyer` and `FoyerLayer` can use on-disk cache storage. Reports about
  OpenDAL writing cache data outside the configured cache location, leaking
  credentials into cache metadata, or corrupting unrelated local files are in
  scope.
- `atomic_write_dir` and temporary-write behavior are in scope when OpenDAL
  creates or renames files itself.

Symlink behavior for local filesystems should be documented explicitly by the
service. A report about symlink traversal should not be closed solely because
OpenDAL is a library; it should be triaged against the service's documented
local filesystem contract.

### 4.3 Credential isolation

OpenDAL must not leak credentials between independent operators, services, or

> layers in the same process.

Reviewer: What will be the policy for forked processes?

Reviewer 2: it's not in opendal scope since we can't do anything

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenDAL must not leak credentials between independent operators, services, or layers within the same process.

Sharing OpenDAL operators across processes (e.g., via fork) while reusing configurations and credentials remains users' responsibility.
```

  rule.

Paths, namespace names, and roots can be sensitive in some deployments. OpenDAL
does not treat them as credentials by default; callers that need stronger
privacy must choose their observability layers and sinks accordingly.

### 4.5 Request construction and signing

OpenDAL is responsible for constructing requests that match the configured
service, endpoint, root, path, and operation.

Examples:

- `skip_signature = true` must only skip request signing. It must not silently
  change HTTPS to HTTP, disable endpoint validation, or weaken unrelated
  transport behavior.
- `allow_anonymous` is a deprecated compatibility alias only for the services
  that still expose it.
- A service must not send credentials to an endpoint other than the endpoint
  selected by the trusted caller config.

If the caller configures a malicious endpoint, sending requests to that endpoint
is caller responsibility. If OpenDAL ignores the caller's configured endpoint or
mixes it with another operator's credentials, that is in scope.

### 4.6 Response handling robustness

OpenDAL trusts the configured backend for semantic correctness: object bytes,

> ETags, metadata, listing order, backend authz decisions, and durability claims

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ETags, metadata, listing order, backend authentication and authorization decisions, and durability claims
```

Each binding has its own version. A security property confirmed for Rust core
version `X` is not automatically confirmed for every binding release named `X`.

## 5. Out Of Scope

The following are not OpenDAL vulnerabilities by default.

### 5.1 Backend-side authorization and configuration

Storage-provider policy is owned by the backend and operator.

Examples:

- Public S3 bucket policy.
- HDFS permissions.
- POSIX file mode bits outside OpenDAL's own path construction.
- OAuth scopes granted to Google Drive, Dropbox, OneDrive, or similar services.
- Database user privileges.

### 5.2 Malicious storage services selected by the caller

The caller is responsible for choosing the storage service and endpoint.

Examples:

- A caller configures an attacker-controlled S3-compatible endpoint and the
  endpoint receives signed requests.
- A WebDAV, FTP, SFTP, HTTP, database, or SaaS endpoint lies about object
  contents, metadata, ETags, timestamps, or consistency.
- A backend returns data that fails an application-level integrity check.

OpenDAL does not provide cryptographic authentication of backend bytes.
Applications that need end-to-end integrity must add it above OpenDAL.

> ### 5.3 Host application authn/authz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5.3 Host application authentication and authorization
```

  under the License.
-->

# Apache OpenDAL Security Threat Model

## 1. Status

This document defines the security boundary for Apache OpenDAL. It is intended
for maintainers, security reporters, downstream users, and automated security
scanners that need to decide whether a report describes an OpenDAL
vulnerability or a responsibility of the embedding application, storage backend,
or deployment.

The canonical disclosure process remains
[`website/community/security.md`](website/community/security.md). Reports that
may affect OpenDAL security should be sent to `private@opendal.apache.org`
before public disclosure.

## 2. Purpose

OpenDAL is an in-process storage access library. It gives a host application a
uniform `Operator` API over many storage backends. It is not a daemon, gateway,
identity provider, authorization service, sandbox, or multi-tenant broker.

The purpose of this document is to help maintainers triage security reports by
answering three questions:

1. What does OpenDAL treat as its own security boundary?
2. What is delegated to the embedding application or storage provider?
3. Which reports are OpenDAL vulnerabilities, hardening requests, caller

>    misuse, or out-of-scope deployment issues?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. What is OpenDAL's security boundary?
2. What security responsibilities do applications that use OpenDAL have?
3. What security responsibilities do cloud and network storage providers have?
4. Which of the following categories apply to a security report: OpenDAL vulnerabilities,
hardening requests, user misuse, or out-of-scope deployment issues?
```

The most important premise is:

> > OpenDAL trusts the storage service that the caller configured it to access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most important premises are:

```suggestion
> OpenDAL trusts storage services for fulfilling storage capabilities defined per documentation.
> OpenDAL also trusts users to provide secure configuration and use OpenDAL as users' storage layer.
``````

If a caller intentionally points OpenDAL at an untrusted S3-compatible endpoint,
WebDAV server, FTP server, database, local path, or other backend, the caller
is responsible for the consequences of trusting that backend. OpenDAL does not
authenticate remote object contents, prove remote metadata correctness, or
protect the caller from a malicious storage service that the caller chose.

That premise does not remove OpenDAL's responsibility for its own library
boundary. OpenDAL must still preserve its API contracts, keep credentials
isolated, avoid leaking secrets through debug or observability output, and avoid

> memory-safety violations in code reachable through the public API.

Reviewer: Minor fluency update 

```suggestion
If a user intentionally uses OpenDAL to access an untrusted S3-compatible endpoint,
WebDAV server, FTP server, database, local path, or other backend, the user
is responsible for the consequences of configured service. OpenDAL does not
authenticate remote object contents, prove remote metadata correctness, or
protect the user from a malicious storage service that the user chose.

That premise does not remove OpenDAL's responsibility for OpenDAL library
boundary. OpenDAL must still preserve OpenDAL API contracts, isolate credentials, avoid leaking secrets in debug or observability output, and avoid
memory-safety violations in code reachable through OpenDAL public API.
```

- `services::Foyer` and `FoyerLayer` can use on-disk cache storage. Reports about
  OpenDAL writing cache data outside the configured cache location, leaking
  credentials into cache metadata, or corrupting unrelated local files are in
  scope.
- `atomic_write_dir` and temporary-write behavior are in scope when OpenDAL
  creates or renames files itself.

Symlink behavior for local filesystems should be documented explicitly by the
service. A report about symlink traversal should not be closed solely because
OpenDAL is a library; it should be triaged against the service's documented
local filesystem contract.

### 4.3 Credential isolation

OpenDAL must not leak credentials between independent operators, services, or
layers in the same process.

Examples:

- A request from `Operator` B must not be signed with credentials from
  `Operator` A.
- An OAuth token, temporary credential, signer context, or credential-provider
  cache must not be shared across operators unless the sharing is explicitly
  configured by the caller.
- `disable_config_load`, `disable_ec2_metadata`, and `disable_vm_metadata` must
  prevent the ambient credential sources they document.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users should clear credentials or not to use an operator after forking processes. Credentials from parent processes are public to child processes.
```

Reviewer 2: It's not part of our scope, we don't need to teach users how to handle.

Reviewer: Ok

## 8. Examples

### 8.1 In scope

- `services::Fs` maps a normalized OpenDAL path outside the configured `root`
  through OpenDAL path construction.
- `Operator` B signs a request with credentials configured for `Operator` A.
- A builder `Debug` implementation prints a secret access key.
- A service-specific XML parser can trigger memory unsafety through a normal
  `Operator::list` call.
- A binding safe API can trigger use-after-free in the C ABI.
- `disable_config_load = true` still reads credentials from the ambient
  environment source it promised to disable.
- `skip_signature = true` silently downgrades HTTPS to HTTP.

### 8.2 Out of scope by default

- The caller configures an attacker-controlled S3-compatible endpoint and that
  endpoint receives signed requests.
- A storage service returns false object bytes or a misleading ETag.
- A host application forwards an untrusted tenant path to OpenDAL without its
  own authorization checks.
- A bucket policy allows public reads.
- A caller exposes `dav-server-opendalfs` without an authn layer.
- A caller reads a huge object with an API that materializes the whole object in
  memory.

> ### 8.3 Usually hardening or documentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8.3 Security and documentation improvement
```

| `services::Fs` lexical root | OpenDAL must not map normalized operation paths outside the configured `root` through its own lexical path construction. |
| `services::Fs` symlinks | `services::Fs` follows normal host filesystem semantics. It is not a sandbox against symlinks that already exist under the configured `root`, unless a service-specific document later promises stronger confinement. |
| Canonical location | This file, `SECURITY-THREAT-MODEL.md`, is the repository-level threat model. The project security page may link to it, but the disclosure process remains there. |
| Version binding | A report should be triaged against the threat model version present in the affected release tag or maintenance branch. |
| Component drift | When services, layers, bindings, or local resource surfaces change, this file should be updated in the same pull request or a linked follow-up. |
| Observability privacy | Credentials are secrets and must be redacted. Paths, roots, and namespaces are operational context, not credentials by default, but deployments that treat them as sensitive should configure observability accordingly. |

## 10. Revision Triggers

> This model should be revisited when any of the following changes happen:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will revisit this threat model when any of the changes:
```
